what is SQL ?
    SQL stands for Structured Query Language. 
    It is a programming language used for managing and manipulating relational databases. 
    SQL allows users to create, read, update, and delete data in a database.
    It is widely used in various applications, including web development, data analysis, and database administration.
    SQL provides a standardized way to interact with databases, making it easier for developers and analysts to work with data across different platforms and systems.
what is data ?
    Data is a raw facts. 
    It can be in various forms, such as numbers, text, images, audio, and video. 
what is information ?
    infrormation is processe of meaaningful data.
what is database ?
    A databae is an organized collection of structured informatioin or data.
RDMS
    RDBMS stands for Relational Database Management System. is a software system that manages relational databases.
    It is a type of database management system that organizes data into tables with rows and columns. 
    RDBMS allows users to create, read, update, and delete data in a structured way using SQL.
    Some popular RDBMS include MySQL, PostgreSQL, Oracle Database, and Microsoft SQL Server.
Non-RDBMS
    Non-RDBMS stands for Non-Relational Database Management System. is a software system that manages non-relational databases.
    It is a type of database management system that does not organize data into tables with rows and columns.
    Non-RDBMS allows users to create, read, update, and delete data.
    Non-RDBMS databases are designed to handle unstructured or semi-structured data, such as documents, key-value pairs, graphs, and wide-column stores.
    Some popular Non-RDBMS databases include MongoDB, Cassandra, Redis, and Neo4j.
    
                        RDBMS                                             Non-RDBMS
    Organizes data into tables with rows and columns.   Does not organize data into tables with rows and columns.
    Uses SQL for data manipulation.                     Uses various query languages or APIs for data manipulation. 
    Suitable for structured data.                       Suitable for unstructured or semi-structured data.
    Examples: MySQL, PostgreSQL, 
    Oracle Database, Microsoft SQL Server.               Examples: MongoDB, Cassandra, Redis, Neo4j.

                        SQL                                                Non-SQL
    SQL stands for Structured Query Language.           Non-SQL refers to databases that do not use SQL for data manipulation.
    SQL is a programming language used for managing     Uses various query Languages or APIs for data manipulation.
    and manipulating relational databases.
    SQL allows users to create, read, update, and       Non-SQL databases are designed to handle unstructured or semi-structured data.
    delete  
    examples: MySQL, PostgreSQL, Oracle Database, Microsoft SQL Server.   Examples: MongoDB, Cassandra, Redis, Neo4j.

SQL Statements
    SQL statements or SQL queries are instructions that relational databases system unterstand. 
    Some common SQL statements include:
    - SELECT: Used to retrieve data from a database.
    - INSERT: Used to add new data to a database.
    - UPDATE: Used to modify existing data in a database.
    - DELETE: Used to remove data from a database.
    - CREATE: Used to create new tables or databases.
    - DROP: Used to delete tables or databases.
    - ALTER: Used to modify the structure of a database or table.
    - JOIN: Used to combine rows from two or more tables based on a related column between them.
    - WHERE: Used to filter records based on specified conditions.
    - GROUP BY: Used to group rows that have the same values in specified columns into summary rows.
    - ORDER BY: Used to sort the result set in ascending or descending order.

SQL Commands
    SQL commands are categorized into different types based on their functionality. 
    Some common SQL command types include:
    - Data Definition Language (DDL): Commands used to define and manage database structures, such as CREATE, DROP, and ALTER.
    - Data Manipulation Language (DML): Commands used to manipulate data within the database, such as SELECT, INSERT, UPDATE, and DELETE.
    - Data Control Language (DCL): Commands used to control access to the database, such as GRANT and REVOKE.
    - Transaction Control Language (TCL): Commands used to manage transactions in the database, such as COMMIT and ROLLBACK.
    - Data Query Language (DQL): Commands used to query data from the database, such as SELECT.

                                                SQL Commands
        DDL                     DML                      DCL                      TCL                      DQL
        CREATE                  SELECT                   GRANT                    COMMIT                   SELECT
        DROP                    INSERT                   REVOKE                   ROLLBACK
        ALTER                   UPDATE
        RENAME                  DELETE
        TRUNCATE                MARGE

CREATE TABLE table_name (
    column1 datatype,
    column2 datatype,
    column3 datatype,
   ....
);    - create a new table in the database with specified columns and data types.

ALTER TABLE table_name
 - ADD column_name datatype;    - add a new column to an existing table.
 - MODIFY column_name datatype; - modify the data type of an existing column in a table.
 = DROP COLUMN column_name;    - remove a column from an existing table.

INSERT INTO table_name (column1, column2, column3, ...)
VALUES (value1, value2, value3, ...);    - insert new data into
            or 
INSERT INTO table_name
VALUES (value1, value2, value3, ...);    - insert new data into a table without specifying column names (values must be in the same order as the columns in the table).

UPDATE table_name
SET column1 = value1, column2 = value2, ...
WHERE condition;    - update existing data in a table based on specified conditions.

DELETE FROM table_name
WHERE condition;    - delete data from a table based on specified conditions.

TRUNCATE TABLE table_name;    - remove all data from a table while keeping the table structure intact.
DROP TABLE table_name;    - delete an entire table from the database, including its structure and data.

CONSTRAINT constraint_name
    PRIMARY KEY (column_name);    - define a primary key constraint on a column, ensuring that each value in the column is unique and not null.
    FOREIGN KEY (column_name) REFERENCES other_table(column_name);    - define a foreign key constraint on a column, establishing a relationship between two tables.
    UNIQUE (column_name);    - define a unique constraint on a column, ensuring that each value in the column is unique.
    CHECK (condition);    - define a check constraint on a column, ensuring that values in the column meet a specified condition.
    
